there's this thing that drives me nuts  which is  that people talk about like the food  system is a climate problem you know the  food system has a role in the  biodiversity collapse that's kind of  like saying  you know instead of uh calling out you  know the oil industry it's like liquids  are  you know a climate problem  it's all about animal egg every other  part of the food system is just a total  grounding error in terms of  environmental impact we should forget  about saying it's the food system it's  the animal ag system it's livestock  that's the problem  that's a topic for a video  [Applause]  so um it's very weird to me that  i'm here  sort of as a representative of the food  industry a little over 10 years ago  i was a research scientist and professor  at stanford and  i  was trying to decide what was the most  impactful thing i could do  next  and as i did my research i realized that  number one  and i'll explain some of why this is  true  that i i hadn't realized it but the most  destructive technology on earth and the  most destructive technology i think  in human history is the use of animals  to make food to turn plants into  meat and fish and dairy foods  um  it's worse than the fossil fuel industry  and i'm happy to get into that debate  and nobody was serious not only was  nobody  seriously working on it  but no one was really much talking about  it we're here in glasgow  to talk about climate change i think  it's worth saying that  there's another issue that's very  intertwined with this and obviously  landscape forum  is very well aware of this  which is that we're also in in the late  stages of a global collapse of  biodiversity that is  is  still progressing has wiped out  more than two-thirds of the wild animals  that were living on earth 50 years ago  and shows no sign of stopping and  it's almost entirely that is almost  entirely due to our use of animals as a  food technology  the land footprint of animal agriculture  which is about 40 of ours when you talk  about global landscapes basically the  human impact on global landscapes is  animal agriculture and that's almost  full stop all the cities on earth fit on  less than one percent of rice land area  the the  crops that we grow  to consume directly as food fit on about  five percent of this land area and then  analog is  forty percent of worst land area the  climate uh the greenhouse gases  that are emitted by the fossil fuel  industry or by the the use of fossil  fuels as an energy system  is  essentially irreversible i mean  you're not going to be able to turn the  carbon dioxide  that came from burning oil and fossil  and and coal back into oil and coal if  you did it the energy it would take to  do that would create its own climate  problems it's just not going to happen  but animal agriculture  is completely different it's almost  completely reversible as a cause of  climate change why is it reversible  because basically  the the the biggest cause of co2  emissions from virtually the only cause  of co2 emissions from animal ag  historically is that forty percent of  earth's land area was cleared of its  pre-existing biomass to make room for  mostly cows and sheep and grazing  animals as well as feed crops okay  and in that process  the um the amount of biomass that was  converted into co2  to clear the land  this the the carbon content was  equivalent to 22 years worth of fossil  fuel emissions at the current rate you  can't turn co2 back into  coal but you can turn it back into  biomass okay you can literally reverse  the process  and what it requires is  clearing  the  livestock and feed crops  off the land and allowing  the native ecosystems to recover or  allowing or actually  facilitating the process of recovery  which is the biggest step you can take  not only to  address climate change  but also  the the biodiversity collapse okay it's  reversible there's also methane and  nitrous oxide which are powerful  greenhouse gases  um animal agriculture is  overwhelmingly the responsible for  nitrous oxide it's about 90 plus of  nitrous oxide emissions come from animal  agriculture  and about half of methane emissions  come from that in the agriculture two  minutes okay i can do this in two  minutes  um  the way we're approaching the problem is  basically when i found the company i  said look  we're not going to solve this by waiting  for government or cop or the un or  anyone to solve it i mean we see how  well that works right  this is something that requires  individual action and to be frank it  requires radical action  because the the  the babble that's going on there is  basically because  nobody wants things to change much they  want  do  things that don't ruffle any feathers  they don't you know everybody comes out  no one gets  you know disrupted or anything like that  yet somehow with no  disruption this radical thing will  somehow magically happen that's not  going to be true that what we're what  we're trying to do on possible foods is  the least radical thing we could do it's  entirely market-based and i think it  creates a great outcome for  for uh farmers it has to be individual  action and the only way and that it's  absolutely critical  argue with me  we have to get rid of animal agriculture  full stop as fast as possible a quick  remark so the government was mentioned a  few times uh in this whole thing even  though it's obviously from a individual  and private perspective mostly  but i think what is looming large is the  kind of political philosophical  perspective  that that you know governments and  uh people that are politically involved  um you know engage in it it would  include something like uh uh how we view  subsidies and what what the  what they're there for  for example uh in geneva  on the border on in geneva you would  have subsidy because switzerland is one  of the most subsidizing countries on the  on the earth and so you you would have  uh agriculture in geneva where right on  the other side in france you have none  because it's not really um effective in  that way  so  i guess i would like to know what you  what your views or your thoughts are on  that uh the  political philosophical perspective uh  that would um  uh that would coincide  and that would  go well with your approaches i think the  problem is to be honest it's a big  problem at cop is that the policy making  um is dominated by  the wealthy and powerful  and the victims are not this is  something that requires individual  action and to be frank it requires  radical action  because the the  the babel that's going on there is  basically because nobody wants things to  change much well i think if you have a  market-based approach  um  it doesn't compel those farmers to do  anything if they're if if if  it's their own food security to have a  cow or a pig or something like that or  it's something in the local economy it  it won't be threatened  by  um  you know plant-based products that might  be healthier and more expensive and and  stuff like that if they're not  accessible to those farmers their  communities it's it's  it's not going to take away what they're  doing right no one's going to go and  steal their cow or pig i would never  advocate for that  the way we approach the problem is first  of all  we are  not trying to  build something new in addition to the  incumbent industry  the company was founded seriously not  because he wanted to be a big food  company but because we wanted to  collapse the animal ag industry  in the in in  the best possible way which is just  take away their customers by making a  better product with a much more  sustainable technology but also make  something that better serves their needs  as they define them and frankly every  time we sell a product i'm vegan so i  love vegans but  my wife's vegan but  every time we sell a product to a vegan  i consider it to be a pretty much a  waste because it didn't it didn't steal  a customer from the meat industry and i  think that's just an interesting thing  about food people don't buy food because  um of the philosophical sure you know  principles they buy it because they like  how it tastes and it's nutritional and  it's affordable  [Applause]  in politics  we live with we vie with we compete  against more than one model of utopian  thinking and the different modes of  utopian thinking have to be challenged  have to be debunked have to be  overturned  in different ways  smoking  do you think  in the next 20 years  we're going to eliminate  cigarette smoking and if so  how do you think that simply because  people have access to  healthier  better alternatives to smoking that  they're just gonna stop  you think that the free market  left to its own devices in the next 20  years is going to achieve a cigarette  free world or a marijuana free world  and if you do believe that  why do you think that would happen in  the next 20 years why do you think it  didn't happen  in the last 20 years when people already  knew that cigarettes caused cancer that  cigarettes shorten your lifespan that  cigarettes reduced your ability to just  walk up a flight of stairs or even enjoy  the taste of your food everyone's known  for the last 20 years  the terrible harm  that cigarettes and smoking of any kind  including smoking marijuana they've  known the terrible direct harm it will  do  in their own lives  when i would take the train  in france  every station the train stopped at you  would see people scuttling out to smoke  a cigarette  on the platform and then scuttling back  in again  some of them were rich and some of them  were poor they were from all walks of  life you got to see a great cross  of the nicotine addicts  of our society i used to live near a  hospital and walk past the front of the  hospital every day and you'd see people  standing in front of the  standing in a specially designated place  next to an ashtray several meters in  front of the hospital you'd see them  standing there and smoking wasn't just  patients  doctors  nurses  highly educated people people who don't  just know about the  health consequences but people who  suffer a certain level of stigma  and shame  and ridicule at their workplace every  day they're not working at a nightclub  they're working at a hospital and they  gotta go stand in front of the front  door  to smoke cigarettes but that pressure  that level of coercion  isn't enough for them  to make the change and then you scale it  up and you think of all of france and  you look at the percentage of people in  france who still smoke cigarettes oh and  it gets worse you look at the russians  you look at the ukrainians you look at  southern china you take a look  around the world  when we think about utopianism and the  dangers of utopian thinking we tend to  imagine  left-wing ideologues we tend to imagine  people who  subscribe to  a coercive  state-centered model of society people  who think that having better laws  a better constitution  better authoritarian system of  government will create a utopia  despite  human nature from the top down but it is  just as dangerous to believe in this  libertarian fiction this free market  fiction  that these fundamental problems in our  society whether it be smoking cigarettes  eating meat dairy  yogurt the wearing of leather  it is just as dangerous  for us to live with the delusion and  propound the delusion  that these massive problems  on such a staggering scale  can be solved or will be solved within  the next 20 years  just through public education  making a healthier  option a healthier alternative available  given them giving them freedom of choice  on the free market  there was a stand-up comedy routine from  chris rock  i don't think he delivered the line very  well maybe there's more than one version  of it that exists on tape  today  but he he said uh  he's known  cocaine dealers  and he just can't imagine  any of these guys standing there in  their hotel room  with a briefcase  full of cocaine standing there and  thinking  what am i going to do with all this  crack  who who's going to buy it who's who's  going to buy  this i  i just don't know how i'm going to  you know what i'm gonna have to have  a half price sale  for how many years  have people known  that cocaine heroin  fentanyl  don't just cause brain damage  cause premature death  they ruin your life and then at some  point they take your life away from you  how would you achieve a society with  zero cigarette smoking not a five  percent reduction in cigarette smoking  absolutely  zero  cigarette smoking it would take a level  of coercion  a level of san fran that most people in  western democracies cannot imagine  what would it take to lower the rate of  cocaine use  the rate of heroin use the rate of  fentanyl use in the city of los angeles  from its current levels  to just being equal to the levels of  hard drug use that you see in tokyo  japan  it's not zero but a dramatic reduction  in hard drug use it would take a level  of coercion it would take a level of  sang-fra that i can imagine  and i'm willing to commit to  and i can recognize that making the  transition in just 20 years  from a society that worships meat  to a society that despises it  it's gonna involve coercion it's gonna  involve commitment it's gonna involve  sacrifice and if we're even just talking  about it at a conference like this is it  too much for me to ask for some measure  of realism for some measure of  sang for  [Music]  you